In this section we are going to talk
about monitoring application health
and of course, since we are monitoring it,
we need to be able to implement
a health check in the
application itself as well.
Now, even in traditional environments,
it's important to get some sort of
indication about whether an
application is working correctly or
considers itself to be healthy or not in
order to be able to automate reactions.
But in container orchestration environments
such as Kubernetes and OpenShift,
that is even more important because
both of them have functionality that
allows us to automatically restart
the application if it starts
reporting unhealthy state.
That includes decommissioning the
application when it's no longer
healthy and not putting it in
service until it reports it's ready.
So we have 2 states, 2 phases.
One before we put
application into service,
waiting for it to become ready.
And one, hopefully, never
or as late as possible,
where the application no longer
reports that it's alive,
so we have to decommission it and
replace it with a new instance.
The MicroProfile Health specification
allows services to actually
notify of their current health status
or report it, if they are invoked,
which allows the systems that are
orchestrating those applications
to react accordingly.
We have 2 dedicated endpoints called
/q/health/ready and
/q/health/live.
Now, it's important to
note that if you've seen
an older version of Quarkus or
MicroProfile health tutorials,
in the older versions,
they use the /health endpoint,
for both liveness and readiness.
But the health endpoint is now optional
and exposes the combination of the 2.
If you want to see
just readiness state or just liveness
state of the application,
then you can use the 2 individual ones.
Additionally, it's now changed to
the prefix of /q/health.
It's no longer at the top level.
Now how do you add health
checks to your source code?
We have a functional interface
called HealthCheck,
which just has a single method call,
which is convenient because we
can use Lambda invocations,
Lambda definitions to
define health checks.
Now, there are 2 ways
to define a health check.
One is using a Liveness annotation
and the other one is using
a Readiness annotation.
For the @Liveness annotation,
we simply annotate an implementation of
the health check with
the Liveness annotation
and construct the health response into
the call method. For Readiness is the same,
except that we annotate it with the
Readiness annotation and implement
the call with something that checks
whether the application is ready or not.
Now, how do we construct the
response though, in both cases,
we are expected to return
a HealthCheckResponse.
We can use the builder pattern,
so obviously this will involve
some internal testing.
The application needs to be able
to probe its internal state.
That is something that
cannot be prescribed.
It depends on actual application at hand.
But once you've got the result,
you will just simply use
the HealthCheckResponses builder
methods such as for example,
named, which gives the health check a name,
and then a state indication
which is either .up or .down
and conclude with the
build method invocation.
So it's just chaining as in any
other builder pattern approach.
And this final build
invocation would return
a HealthCheckResponse with the name of
my-health-check and the status of up.
You can alternatively use a
down method instead of up,
if the state is up or it's not up.
Or you simply use the state method and use
a Boolean variable as a parameter and that
will decide what state the method is in.
There's an abbreviation for
up and down which conjoins,
or it joins the conjoined named and up or named
and down method invocations
you can just simply, if that
is all you want to set,
you can just simply invoke up and the name
of the health check or down and
the name of the health check,
not having to invoke a final
build at the end as well.
There are many other methods
in the builder pattern.
Feel free to examine and explore them as
you are working on the next exercise.
It is possible to provide additional
data in the HealthCheckResponse.
For example, if we have a HealthCheckResponse method call, that,
let's say returns load average.
Load average has or is a
specific number, right?
So just up or down doesn't
tell us anything useful.
We would need to provide an actual number
and we can do that by using the withData
method in the builder sequence,
specifying what the parameter is and
specifying what the value
of this parameter would be.
This is very useful if you want to
provide also the causes for the error or
whatever indicators you need
to provide alongside with
just a black and white up and down status.
So you can provide, for example, metrics,
you can provide causes of errors such
as exception, types, messages and similar.
And even in case of an error,
estimated time to recovery.
And once you've defined the health
checks in your application,
be it Readiness or Liveness, you can
also instruct OpenShift to use
those endpoints in making sure
your application is ready to
be used and making sure that your
application is still alive.
You can simply add a
couple of attributes to
the application.properties file that
are called quarkus.openshift.
liveness-probe, or quarkus.openshift.readiness-probe.
Now, there are 2 main parameters
that you want to use here.
First one is the initial delay,
which is the delay,
well, you simply do not want
to perform that check
for the readiness probe.
That means, you know,
this application is not going to be
ready sooner than in 5 seconds.
So in the readiness-probe.initial-delay,
you would set the value to
5 seconds, if you know that's
how long it usually takes.
In liveness probe, it doesn't make sense to
use a liveness probe before
the application report says ready.
But unfortunately the implementation in
OpenShift starts probing both liveness
and readiness at the same time.
So again, if you know that your application
always takes a certain amount of
time to start and then always
works fine for at least the
next couple of seconds,
that's how long you would set the
liveness-probe.initial-delay 2.
Don't set it too long obviously
in case the service suddenly flaps.
Those checks are performed periodically,
so if the first check fails,
another one is performed
subsequently ends on.
That is for readiness probes,
of course, readiness probes,
period of repetition of those
checks should not be too long.
Because if it fails for the first time,
then it's going to take that amount
of time before we try again.
And for that amount of time,
the application is not
going to be seen as ready
even if it was because we are just
not testing and we cannot detect it.
So do not set the readiness
probes period to too much.
For liveness probes period,
the period is the maximum amount of
time that a liveness failure
can go unnoticed basically.
So again, set the
liveness probes period,
to something sensible and
acceptable for your clients.
Some Quarkus extensions actually add
health checks automatically by
adding them to your applications,
such as the agroal extension,
which handles datasource connections,
can automatically report whether
the database connection that
it's in charge of is up or
down. Then there are some other extensions that
add the health checks as well.
Let's move on to the next video, where
we have a health check exercise.